the un's top court is holding hearings
today over new emergency measures sought
by South Africa to stop Israel's attacks
on Rafa the international court of
justice convened to hear a case filed by
South Africa accusing Israel of stepping
up what it called a genocide in Gaza
it's urging the court to order a halt to
Israel's assault on Rafa South Africa's
legal team are presenting their case
today and Israel will speak tomorrow the
hearings are part of a broader case
against Israel and they've been taking
place as Israeli forces pushed into Rafa
where many of gaza's displaced people
have been
Sheltering Rafa in southern Gaza a
shelter for more than a million
Palestinians and now the focus of
Israel's military assault as troops push
into the
city displaced Palestinians flee again
while their allies abroad hope to
prevent further
disaster South Africa has petitioned the
international court of justice for
Israel to immediately withdraw from Rafa
and cease its military offensive it also
asks Israel to take all effective
measures to facilitate unimpeded access
to
Aid these measures are part of an
ongoing case filed by South Africa that
accuses Israel of violating the genocide
convention an interim ruling and in
January stopped short of calling for a
ceasefire but the court did state that
there was a real and imminent risk under
the convention and demanded provisional
measures from Israel to prevent genocide
isra Defense Force Israel must in
accordance with its obligations under
the genocide convention in relation to
Palestinians in Gaza take all measures
within its power to prevent the
commission of all acts within the scope
of Article 2 of the convention
of the isra Israel has said it is acting
in accordance with international law and
has called the genocide case
baseless the hearings taking place this
week will focus on emergency measures
only South Africa will present its side
first the country has a long history of
solidarity with Palestinians its leaders
have drawn comparisons between the
situation in Israel and the Palestinian
territory and that of South Africa's
former apartheid
system a ruling on the broader genocide
case will likely Take
Years icj rulings are binding but the
court has no way to enforce
them where is the International court of
justice can everyone only talk about Aid
we don't want Aid we want a permanent
ceasefire and a full withdrawal from
Gaza Gaza has been destroyed and Rafa is
not
Gaza as a whole is not
safe any ruling in South Africa's favor
will however compound International
pressure on Israel at a time when
Israeli leadership is increasingly
isolated over its war in
Gaza our correspondent B rard has been
following these hearings for us band
what arguments did South Africa put
forward today
it's already the third time that South
Africa is appealing to the court um to
come up with new interim measures or
provisional measures against Israel in
this genocide case South Africa is
arguing that Israel is intensifying um
its shelling and bombardments in Gaza
and it's also now on the ground in Rafa
and that uh um the population in Gaza is
willingly starved to death by Israel and
therefore um the South African party
wants the court to step up its efforts
to keep Israel to prevent um this what
they call a genocide so the court should
order an immediate ceasefire and
withdrawal of Israeli troops from Gaza
or at least Rafa um uh let's listen to
the lead Council of South Africa vuzi
muzi mando
zaa sadly South Africa is yet again
compelled to return to this court in
recognition of its obligation under the
genocide convention due to the
continuing annihilation of the
Palestinian people with over 35,000 now
killed and most of Gaza reduced to
Rubble despite the short notice of this
oral hearing South Africa has traveled
here today to do what it can to urgently
stop the ongoing genocide the gravity of
the attacks requiring urgent and Speedy
proceedings to preserve the rights of
the Palestinian people a commitment
which South Africa takes
seriously all right we heard the South
African Council there ban what are the
next steps
now well South Africa is making its case
today and tomorrow the court will hear
arguments from Israel the rebuttle from
the Israeli side and Israel will of
course also point to the fact that Hamas
which is uh seen as a terrorist
organization in the in the EU by Israel
and United States and others that Hamas
is also part of uh this whole um uh
thing on the ground there South Africa
did not mention Hamas so far um Israel
is arguing as soon as Hamas stops its
resistance and its fighting then the war
would be over and the intention Israel
has no intention actually to kill the
Palestinian people and Israel is also
rebutting that there is a genocide going
on so we will hear that tomorrow after
that the court now then will decide
maybe in uh one or two weeks um if the
interim or provisional measures um are
granted um and the general case about
the genocide that will take years until
a ver will be handed down so if the icj
were to Grant this emergency request
brought in by South Africa how powerful
would it be because icj rulings are
binding but the court has no way to
enforce
them yeah the rulings are binding but
they don't have much effect on the
ground as you can see now in this war of
Israel against um the Hamas because is
Israel is just ignoring what the court
says um and the the the main problem for
the court is there's no police force or
something in the world that can force
either side to follow the rulings of the
court so it's a a moral and a political
pressure but very difficult to set that
in motion on the ground really well
South Africa's ambassador to the
Netherlands urged the world Court to
order a halt to Israel's assault on Rafa
the city in southern Gaza has been
Sheltering many of the displaced gazans
sadly South Africa is yet again
compelled to return to this court in
recognition of its obligation under the
genocide convention due to the
continuing annihilation of the
Palestinian people with over 35,000 now
killed and most of Gaza reduced to
Rubble despite the short notice of this
oral hearing South Africa has traveled
here today to do what it can to urgently
stop the ongoing genocide the gravity of
the attacks requiring urgent and Speedy
proceedings to preserve the rights of
the Palestinian people a commitment
which South Africa takes
seriously well I'm joined Now by our
correspondent Rosie Berard she's been
following the hearings for us Rosie walk
us through the the main arguments that
were put forward today by South
Africa well South Africa is back in the
cour it's not the first time we've been
here but what South Africa is saying is
that Israel's actions in Rafa not only
amount to a significant escalation but
they say a real change in facts on the
ground which South Africa is arguing is
a real danger to Palestinians as a group
in Gaza to the health system in Gaza to
children and the way they made those
arguments we saw lawyers for example
showing pictures of the destruction in
Gaza much of the strip of course really
reduced to rubble and
I think one moment that really stood out
to me Brent was one of the South African
lawyers really struggling to hold back
tears as she talked particularly about
the plight of children in Gaza now South
Africa has asked the court to come with
emergency orders asking Israel to or
demanding that Israel immediately and
unconditionally withdraw from Gaza it's
also asking that the court demand Israel
allows unimpeded access for humanitarian
workers for the UN and for journalists
do we know what the next step is um for
this
case well the very next step is that
Israel will get to come forward and
mount its own uh arguments and in the
past Israel has dismissed rejected South
Africa's case as baseless blood liable
and in fact Israel's even gone farther
than that and said that it believes that
South Africa is really acting as the the
legal wing of Hamas here South Africa is
a country which traditionally is close
to the Palestinian cause Israel will
likely go on in its arguments to say
that it is responding legitimately it
believes to the Hamas Terror attacks of
October 7th is will likely argue that it
does everything it can to protect
civilians that it's not targeting
civilians that it is in fact targeting
Hamas militants and then it will be up
to the court to deliberate and it will
likely take a couple of weeks over
whether to respond to South Africa South
Africa's request for emergency measures
but the bigger case here Brent over
whether there has in fact been a breach
of the genocide con vention well that
will take years and if the court were to
say yes to South Africa's request for
ordering these emergency measures a stop
to what is going on in Gaza I mean would
would it be enforcable is there any
teeth
here the court itself the un's top Court
doesn't have any enforcement mechanism
if you want any proof of the limits of
its power just recall back in early 2022
the court ordered that Russia stop its
fullscale invasion of Ukraine well we
know that that certainly has not
happened but what I think South Africa
is aiming at here and what certainly
does seem to be the case is that these
kind of this case where we see Israel in
the in the hag it really P piles more
International pressure on Israel over
this ongoing uh over this ongoing
humanitarian crisis in Gaza and I think
that comes specifically at a time where
Israel's relations with its allies here
in Europe for example but also in the
United States are particularly strained
and particularly in light of the ongoing
situation in Rafa which the EU for
example has clearly warned Israel
against in the past against mounting any
sort of full skill assault there DW's
Rosie Bard with the laders tonight from
Brussels Rosie as always thank you